David Cay Johnston is a journalist
author and winner of the 2001 pillow
surprise for beat reporting his works
include a trilogy called beginning in
2003 with perfectly legal on taxes
carrying on in 2007 with free lunch on
subsidies and concluding in 2012 with
the fine print on monopolies his
chronicle Donald Trump's conduct in his
books temples of chance and the New York
time is best-selling the making of
Donald Trump from 2016 he's been called
one of America's most important
journalists by The Washington Monthly
and he has acted as an uncredited source
of documents and insight for major
campaign reports by the Washington Post
The New York Times Bloomberg and network
television his new book it's even worse
than you think what the Trump
administration is doing to America is
the subject of tonight's talk please
join me in welcoming David Cay Johnston
well how nice of you to all come out on
this rainy evening how nice of the
sponsors how romantic you know they turn
the lights down so one of the things I
don't want to do is make you leave here
more depressed than I suspect most of
you are so I will I will do my best to
have a positive outlook I am after all a
provably incurable optimist because I
have eight children so if you have been
following what Donald Trump is doing in
the news you don't know what's in my
book in the news business we tend to
cover politics and controversy we don't
tend to cover government when the New
York Times hired me to cover taxes and
the IRS I had people who their voice I
could just tell they thought oh my god
your career is ruined and I said no no
you don't understand nobody's covered it
right I'm gonna make people think much
differently about our tax system and it
is substance with Donald Trump that you
should care about not so much his tweets
his whose button is bigger nonsense even
his racism as what he is doing to our
government as our employee as our
subordinate I I call him Donald and I
have people all the time thinking why
don't you call him mr. president and I
go because I know it and because we're
equals we've just temporarily imbued him
with the power to act on our behalf but
he's not a king he's not special nor is
Barack Obama or Jimmy Carter or anybody
else the president United States is our
employee and where's boss and we own our
government and we ought to act like
owners
while your ownership interests are being
damaged because what has happened is
Donald who really literally doesn't know
anything when he came into office
brought with him really awful people the
now the ancient Greeks and I used to
teach at Syracuse laws Syracuse law and
it's graduate business school the law of
the ancient world I taught the property
law property and tax law one semester
and the Business Regulation law the
other and one of the things my students
learned in both courses was that the
ancient Greeks had a name for a
government run by the worst of us the
least qualified the most venal the least
caring about their fellow man they
called it a cactus tock recei and it has
sort of a nice tone too you know kaká
stock receipt and so who did Trump bring
in with him well you can see some of
these people all the time there Stephen
Miller who you know his high school
graduation speech in Santa Monica was a
racist diatribe he was mentored by
Richard Spencer from not that far from
here in Whitefish Montana he brought in
Steve baman who says I'm a Leninist by
which he means I want to destroy the
existing order and that's what they're
working on doing for example Housing and
Urban Development tens of billions of
dollars of your tax dollars every year
in many cases frankly not very well
spent
not very thoughtfully spent but the guy
who's the head of the agency I kid you
not he has said this publicly he
believes that the Pyramids at Giza are
greeneries they're not tombs they're
greeneries and this guy's in charge of
Housing and Urban Development Betsy
DeVos heiress marries an heir huge
fortune I will say this which travels
around the country in a private jet at
least she doesn't bill us but has never
attended the public school but is a huge
believer in the benefits of corporate
and religious education
anybody if you want to ask about the
charter school movement and say well
let's talk about Detroit they'll be like
could we talk about anything else the
end of the world because the Detroit set
up what she was deeply involved in it's
just a disaster she is confronted with
the problem of student loans now for
most of this audience like to me when we
went to college never gonna need student
loans College was free at least if you
went in California was completely free
and a lot of other places it was so
cheap it was irrelevant you just get a
summer job and pay for school we now
have over a trillion dollars of student
debt and a lot of it at these creepy not
very good for-profit commercial colleges
so Nance Betsy DeVos says we're gonna
fix this problem so who does she bring
in lobbyists from the companies that
made the loans that caused the problem
by the way she's an investor did that
collection company - student loan debt
collection now it's an irrelevant amount
of money to her multibillion-dollar
fortune but the symbolism is pretty
awful the Trump when Trump came in he
fired every ambassador now legally he
can do that he has a right to do it of
course just because you can do something
doesn't mean you should or as the
Mormons like to say he who must be
commanded in all things as a slothful
and unwise servant and Donald didn't
have anybody to replace these people so
you guys aren't saying terrorism whether
terrorism we have to be alert for the
terrorists but we don't have an
ambassador in Egypt or Jordan or Saudi
Arabia or Libya and in countries like
Australia the most lapdog loyal
supporter of America we don't have an
ambassador either which means when there
are important commercial deals being
discussed we're not at the table how
many people in this room have ever heard
of the RCEP couple of people this is
really important to the lives of your
maybe not yours but certainly your
children grandchildren and other heirs
Donald
ran for president attacked
the trans-pacific partnership if any
journalists had said well tell us
exactly what it is well you know it's
it's trade and it's it's like big it's
it's big it's it's like it's soap it's
Pacific and it's you know really big I
was a critic of the TPP I was one of the
leading critics of it because needed to
be fixed it added monopoly powers it
added corporate powers that diminished
human powers all fixable problems
Donald kills it he doesn't replace it
with anything he doesn't know anything
about trade so what does President G do
he begins promoting his plan the
regional comprehensive economic
partnership instead of 12 countries in
the Pacific excluding China that was the
TPP because partly it was designed to
contain China's economic military and
political ambitions this is 15 Pacific
Rim countries plus India but not us and
what are the trade emissaries from China
telling these countries well when I was
in Australia in the fall to lecture
everybody I talked to government
officials academics businesspeople
journalists the chambermaid who made up
my room they were all like well you know
we're gonna have to get closer to China
and pay more attention to China because
that's the only option nobody has done
more to help China increase its power
and authority in the world then Donald
Trump and the Chinese embassy emissaries
they go around saying listen you need to
tilt away from Washington quit pivoting
to them pivot to us you want to be
wealthy in the future look at our
highways look at our airports look at
our infrastructure look at the people
we're employing look at the wealth we're
creating that country that country it's
railroads are falling apart it's it's
buildings leak they're not fixing
anything and look who's in the White
House and they're succeeding because you
have no choice it's a quote Donald if
you want to have a trade partnership
that's what you've got to do
last summer Donald went to Poland and he
gave a speech and he was surrounded by
adoring people because the right-wing
government of Poland made sure that
anybody who wasn't part of their ruling
party was kept many blocks away and
anybody with a TV camera who tried to go
see the protesters many blocks away got
stopped make sure there was no negative
coverage and Donald gets up and says oh
it's so wonderful how you people love me
love me because of course we created the
presidency to adore the president right
at the very day he's doing this at the
very moment he's doing this shinzo Abbey
is in Brussels signing a Japanese
European Union trade deal so we've got
two major trade partnerships going on in
the world and we're not involved in it
at all
and what does Donnell do I'm gonna kill
NAFTA there are problems with NAFTA and
things we got to fix with NAFTA but a
lot of things we could fix but that's
not his answer and I want to get Mexican
to cooperate so I'm gonna make them pay
for a wall please veterans nonlin says I
love veterans now I pay a lot of
attention that my dad was on a percent
disabled veteran whole world war two you
can imagine the economic circumstances
that I grew up in as a result we're sort
of less than terrific Donald goes around
saying we're going to take care of the
vets I'm mom all for the vets so his
first budget proposes that for many
disabled vets who are getting $35,000 a
year not exactly a fortune when they
reach normal retirement age they will be
cut to $13,000 a year now it hasn't
happened and it's not going to happen
but the point is someone who's for the
vets would never propose that Donald
Trump tells you why I love the cops you
know there's so important the police you
know I'm there the Democrats intellect
the police I'm so far the police so what
is the new tax bill do well it
eliminated miscellaneous deductions so
police officers and firefighters and
EMTs another uniformed personnel who had
to buy a uniform and had to dryclean
their uniforms in the case of cops had
to usually buy their own guns and
bullets they no longer get to deduct
that tell me how this is showing
you know your love and affection for the
cops now a lot of the stuff in my book
about what's happening to our government
about how Trump's team not Donald
personally because he's lazy he spends
five hours a day on the job of being
president an hour that's having lunch
they have loosed into our government I
call political termites and I called met
because unseen by the public these
people are eating away at the structure
of our government they are taking the
investment that you have made after
years and years and years in the State
Department in climate science in
controlling polluters in improving
public health in running the FBI and
they are forcing out the people who are
competent and diligent and know what
they're doing unless they toe the line
that you know as Donald said today on
climate change well you know it's
getting hotter and colder and there's
there's record ice in the Arctic
it was record lost ice in the Arctic and
this isn't what's being covered and this
stuff matters
Donald's crazy tweets you know there may
be insulting there certainly
entertaining but it's what's happening
to our government that is going to
affect your pocketbook the RCEP as an
example they're going to affect maybe
not you and I in terms of getting asthma
or heart disease or cancer from how the
companies that produce toxic have been
freed up to dump their stuff instead of
clean it up like they used to or
segregate it but if you have
grandchildren or great-grandchildren
they're going to be affected and they're
going to be affected even if Donald's
out of office next week because it'll
take a long time to repair these things
the Trump administration stopped posting
information about workers dying on the
job 4,800 people a year die at work in
this country from something doing with
their job and the fines are so minor
that there actually are some awful
employers are just as soon
pay the fine then go to a safe practices
so shaming these people was a project
particularly in the last administration
well they stopped posting the notices
about these deaths we reported about
that at DC report dot org singular DC
report dot org which is a nonprofit news
service my friends and I started it's
mostly volunteer we don't sell your name
we don't have ads it's public service
and they then started putting them back
up for awhile I can't prove that
cause-and-effect I can only tell you the
timeline but this administration has not
posted information on the death of an
American worker on the job since August
17th and I have no reason to believe
they're going to post anymore they don't
care if anything it's this is improper
for government to do these things now we
don't have to put up with this that's
the important message how did this
happen and what do we do about it those
are the questions to ask and out of
Donald Trump become president the
American people put in there we chose he
lost the popular vote even though he
insists he really wanted it was all
those illegals but he won the electoral
college the electoral college that which
was created by the framers of our
constitution for a very specific purpose
we don't even teach its purpose its
purpose was because the framers were so
concerned about mob rule about zealots
getting loose and were ruining our
democracy they put in the electoral
college as a backstop so that if somehow
the public became inflamed with passion
and put in an unqualified crazy person
the Electoral College would deny them
the office well because we haven't used
it for over 200 years at atrophied and
the electrodes who had the absolute
right to vote this way didn't do so a
couple of them did about six of them but
not enough
so the whole idea of this country is
that we choose we decide our fate King
George doesn't decide our fate somebody
else doesn't we do but we've many of us
stopped choosing I have sat in
blue-collar bars in Indiana and Ohio and
Michigan and Wisconsin where I don't go
dressed like this I go dressed like I'm
a blue-collar guy and some event will
happen on the screen and I don't follow
sports I'm of the school that if Marx
had been more than a hundred years later
he would have said commercial sports or
the opiate of the masses
but some play occurs and suddenly the
room is alive and everybody's picking it
apart and people will they'll cite you
know Major League Baseball rule number
whatever and and by memory tell you what
it says I was once in a bar where
somebody argued that the bartender pulls
out the rulebook from behind the bar and
says no Jake's right I mean his
incredible analytical skill then he
asked a question about Paulo I don't
want it dirty
don't want any deal with it you know
that's it sad nothing well that's how
you get Donald Trump in the White House
not having young people be involved how
many how many people raise your hand in
this rumor under 30 well that's more
than I usually get okay and I encourage
you the next time you come to an Elliott
Bay books event about matters of
politics and economics bring somebody
who's younger you know bring somebody
kid from down the street
college student you know you know you
don't have a grandchildren or children
of your own here
somebody's but bring young people get
them to come put the five bucks form for
people in America we don't very little
we don't pay attention to politics and
we don't do it because of course that's
what we've been trained to do what's one
of the sayings you can't fight city hall
shrink am I've written about people my
whole life who've done it well I don't
have any power
nonsense you have the vote
the social research shows that if
everybody voted if we had mandatory
voting like the Australians do we would
have a totally different Congress people
like Paul Ryan would not have a shot
because this country in many ways is
much more socially advanced and
economically concerned about the same
things that Europeans are taking away
financial shocks from people so they can
have decent lives but a lot of people
don't vote or is my best friend who is
basically a socialist at heart Wall
Street Journal editor it's my best
friend you always likes to say screw the
poor the poor get screwed because they
don't vote you go tell him if you'd vote
you wouldn't get screwed and they say
now I'm not going to vote screw the poor
that's our policy in America and we've
done it to middle-class people and
working-class people you know the
average income of the bottom 90% of
Americans in 1967 that's the year I
finished high school was higher than in
2012 the bottom 90% of people in America
are kicked off a lot of them and with
good reason
you drive across this country and you
can go into little towns all over
Nebraska and Kansas and parts of
Minnesota and you'll find that you know
all sorts of people tweaking on math no
jobs place is falling apart
we don't have to have it that way we
chose to do this
some of us chose by not being involved
some of us chose by electing politicians
but whatever the conditions are in this
country there is one absolute to them we
chose nobody forced us to elect the
people who are in office no foreign
potentate came and said you have to be
this way we chose people turn to Donald
Trump because he took the message in my
trilogy free lunch about subsidies
perfectly legal about taxes and the fine
print about monopolies and distilled
from it the basic message and I said in
2012 anybody who runs for president on
the basic message in these
is going to get elected and that message
was Washington has been taking care of
the rich and powerful and in many many
ways they have passed laws and rules
you've never heard of unless you read my
books where they subtly take money out
of your pocket and redistribute to
people at the top and if I could get
people to read these books and to
understand the mechanisms by which
without even your realizing it every
single day Warren Buffett has his hand
in your pocket the pipeline companies
have their hands in your pocket the
cable television companies and the
pharmacy companies and the land title
companies have their hand in your pocket
through laws and rules that except for
the people have benefited from them
nobody nobody knew about they'll get
elected president and Donald who I know
watch me on TV distilled the essence of
that message drain the swamp and so what
did he do once he got in office well he
took the swamp internat of a federally
protected paradise for swamp monsters he
ran against goldman sachs he brought six
people from goldman sachs into his
administration did the exact opposite of
what he said so what do we do about this
well the most important things going to
happen in the history of America since
the Civil War will occur in this country
in November if we keep the Congress we
have Donald Trump will do just fine he
may get a second term despite all the
polls he might get a second term what
are the Republicans told us I mean
they're crystal clear about what's going
on they will destroy the FBI to protect
Donald Trump now I've written lots of
things negative about the FBI and
political spying and I've exposed
foreign agents and written about a lot
of corrupt police activities but at the
end of the day most of people in the FBI
are really trying hard you a good job oh
there's a cub all you know there with
Hillary
and yet the man in the White House is
deeply involved with a foreign power
I mean you imagine when you were in high
school - those of you in the audience
who are my age or older if you went to
high school in the 40s 50s or 60s can
you imagine if you'd had a high school
civics teacher said the day is going to
come when there'll be a Republican
president who will praise the leader in
the Kremlin he will denounce the FBI the
CIA and all the other American
intelligence agencies and the
Republicans in Congress will take his
side and back him up not all about you
but I would have go out of the
principal's office and said mr. Jones
needs to be seen by a psychiatrist but
that's where we are what matters is who
turns out to vote
in this next election gerrymandering
which is how the minority party the
Republican Party and I'm a registered
Republican with many many years standing
manages to be in control is based on
some simple math that you can overcome
you create districts that are 53 54 if
you have to 55% your party and then you
take everybody you think isn't with you
and you Corral them over here in
districts that are 70 80 in at least one
case that I know of almost 90% Democrats
or people you think will vote with the
Democrats well you can defeat a district
that's 53 or 54 for 55% you just turn
out the vote Scott Walker Governor of
Wisconsin remember he had a recall a
couple of years ago he didn't get
recalled the polling data indicated he
could have been recalled you know I
didn't get recall because the brilliant
political strategist from the Democratic
Party and the union's decided they were
going to try and
outspend the Koch brothers on TV it's
nothing you can spend outspend the koch
brothers on had they instead gone to
people and said hey joe or mary i know
you're out of work we want you to come
to the polls five o'clock Election Day
bring your car we're going to put
somebody
in the car with you we're gonna fill
your gas tank at the end of the day
we're gonna give you a couple hundred
bucks and fill your gas tank again and
we want you to drive people to polls
they would have spent 10 percent as much
money and it would have gotten them out
you got to get people to vote now if you
live in the district where it doesn't
matter either you like your
congressperson and you think they're
gonna deal with Trump appropriately or
you live in the district where there's
no possibility of replacing that
congressperson get in your car and drive
to another congressional district call
their contact people there in advance
and work on that district and make
change yet if you can't go do it
get your Aunt Sally or your nephew Jack
or your next-door neighbor to go do it
but don't just gripe you know posting
notes on the internet doesn't do
anything it may make you feel good but
it doesn't change anything and we have
the votes and it's clear that there are
plenty of Americans more than enough to
change Congress and why do you need to
change Congress because the Republicans
will never deal with Donald Trump now
Robert Muller's report when it comes out
I can tell you broadly what's going to
show from my thirty years of knowing
Donald he's a tax cheat he was tried
twice civilly for tax fraud totally lost
the cases had now defensible conduct one
of the questions I've asked recently is
G did he have the audacity to take a
deduction for paying off stormy Daniels
and stormy Daniels and the Playboy
Playmate I assure you are not the only
ones out there she's been doing money
laundering for the Russians for years
he's done all sorts of things with deals
with the Russians that make no economic
sense when he sold the the disgusting
mansion that was torn down a few miles
from our logo to dmitri rebel of love
the cover story was rebel love love was
hiding assets from his wife now you
should think about this run you're
wealthy you're having a horrible divorce
with your spouse and you want to hide
money so of course you're going to
immediately go out and pay twice what
something is worth
now if you want to throw your money away
that makes sense but Vladimir Putin was
investing in Donald Trump the same way
venture capitalists do you invest in a
hundred potential successes ninety-five
of them lose every penny you put into
him four of a make up for the ninety
five and then you get a grand slam home
run like alphabet or Amazon the Kremlin
got Donald Trump Donald Trump is not a
loyal American and if you doubt that go
home look up the email that Rob
Goldstone sent to Don Trump jr. in June
of 2016 and read the fourth paragraph as
part of Russia's efforts to help now
that's not a hey we'd like to help you
would you be interested
email that say we're already in business
together we got a new investment
opportunity email and this is an email
that a month after it was sent Don Jr
said didn't exist Jake Tapper asked him
about on CNN that when the New York
Times sucks this out finally a year
later and Don jr. put it out after that
the Trump White House and Don Jr told
six different stories none of which can
be true all of which are incompatible
with each other one of which was
dictated by the president United States
on Air Force One coming back from Paris
and all of which show a conspiracy
between Donald Trump and the Kremlin and
why people are not in the streets over
this is astonishing to me it's because
Donald is masterful at saying first of
all collusion I don't care about
collusion first of all collisions not a
crime
it's a conspiracy by a foreign power to
put its guy in the White House in which
he was a willing participant
Muller's reports going to be really
devastating but without public hearings
the public isn't going to be ready for
it
when Watergate happened it was dismissed
for a long time as and then we had Sam
Ervin a senator from North Carolina nice
old country lawyer saying moron
who suddenly realized he was going to be
in the history books and by golly his
grandchildren are not going to read
anything about him except that he was an
American hero and patriot and those
hearings went on night day at well most
of us watched him at night on PBS but
day after day after day after day and
bit by bit people begin to learn what
was going on in the Nixon White House
and at the end of the day the difference
between Donald Trump and Richard Nixon
is real simple Richard Nixon's a patriot
he's a crook and he's paranoid he made
lots of bad decisions and he deserved to
be pushed out of office but at the end
of the day he did the patriotic thing he
resigned as president Donald Trump is
pushed out of office I'll tell you what
he's gonna do he will travel the country
for the rest of his life doing on a
bigger scale what he did during the
campaign beat that person up I'll pay
your legal bills he's trying to get
votes and he says this now imagine he's
out of office what he'll say he will
foment violence and revolution and I
have written for almost 50 years now
about people who literally believe I've
been to their conventions that the
government of the United States is a
criminal organization needs to be
overthrown there are books they write
about it there are meetings they had
their fringe groups but boy Donald will
gonna be right in there with them you
have the power to do something the first
thing you have to do is get informed
which is part of the reason I want you
to read my book so that you know what
they're doing not just what he's
tweeting not just his crazy racist
statements not just his flip-flops
because he has no principles of any kind
except the adoration and the
glorification of the world's smartest
greatest memory Donald Trump you know a
man who says they can learn everything
you need to know about nuclear missiles
in 90 minutes and who also says he said
one of the world's leading experts on
the subject on which I am recognized
around the world as an expert tax policy
a subject in which he says I know
nothing of accounting well if you don't
any of accounting that's like saying I'm
the world's greatest pilot but I don't
know a wing
is they just don't go together but
people have to build a case you can't
just say I don't like the guy you got to
also have a positive case what am I
gonna do we'll get rid of Donald Trump
why are we gonna do that
why are we gonna have somebody else
we're gonna somebody else because hey
you know what we want back the clean air
and water act that Richard Nixon signed
into law because a lot fewer of us have
died from cancer and asthma and heart
disease we want to have a society in
which we're not going to bed worried
that we're going to get into a nuclear
war we don't want a president who goes
around saying of course we're going to
use nukes as he did because we want to
have a Department of Housing and Urban
Development run by somebody who actually
knows something about Housing and Urban
Development we want to have an FBI that
isn't demoralized and where people
aren't punished for doing the right
thing and you have the power to do that
you have the power to do that that means
you have to get organized you need to
raise the awareness of other people you
got to patiently listen to people who
don't agree with you and respect the
fact that a lot of people have been sold
to con they really think that Donald
Trump is a demagogue not God God that he
is their Savior there are many people
like a woman who sent me an email from
Indiana who said mr. Johnston I've been
watching you on TV and I don't
understand now that we have a fine
Christian family man in the white house
your head reels at that except if you
only read breitbart or watched Fox News
you'd believe that you would believe
that if you want to look at Breitbart
and Fox News you know I'm probably the
leader of the Sharia loving let's
overthrow the government Muslim crowd
and the Democrats you know they just
want to take all your money for
themselves
you need to persuade people but where
you can't persuade people it's okay
you're not gonna persuade everybody on
the day Richard Nixon resigned 20
9% of Americans supported it 29% not one
member of Congress in either party but
29% of Americans and and that's not
surprising if you know old about
demographics of America Fox News for
years did very very good Polly Roger
Ailes may have been a lot of things but
he was really understood he needed a
good polling it's a year after year
after year Fox News did a poll about
religiosity about 42 to 44 percent of
Americans believe there's an angel
following them around about twenty seven
eight nine percent year after year
believe in witches but in what I think
is a pretty good measure of sexism only
about twenty two or three percent
believe in warlocks well there's gonna
be a crowd of people who will always be
with Donald people who they don't want
to sit next to a Latino in the airplane
they don't want an Asian in the cockpit
and God forbid they don't want to have
to report to a black woman boss they
hate the civil rights movement there has
been a movement in this country for a
long long time to repeal the 14th 14th
and 15th amendments we've had members of
Congress speak in favor of this gets
almost no news coverage but it's out
there you're gonna change those people
get the people who are changeable
persuade them get them to register to
vote get them to the polls elect a
different Congress and when we get a
different Congress we'll get somewhere
and there's one more crucial element to
this pay attention to who's running I
was sent a video the other day that it's
sort of like instagramming I could watch
it and I couldn't watch it again and it
was a couple of young people
good-looking earnest clean-cut they're
gonna run for Congress as Democrats
against Donald Trump and then local TV
reporters ask them some questions and it
was immediately clear they knew nothing
about the government they didn't
understand the house from the Senate
they didn't understand the Constitution
I mean these people were just
eviscerated as idiots and they didn't
have Donald Trump's skill to Buffalo
their way out of the questions you
can't run incompetent people if you want
to change the Congress you got to get
people who know what to do and get them
to do it it's our government we own it
we need to act like owners in if we
don't well tough luck we will slide into
becoming a fascist state over time
because there are people I assure you I
don't know who they are but knowing what
I know of human nature and over fifty
years of reporting there are people who
are looking at Donald and saying boy if
you could get a candidate who didn't
have Donald's deficits somebody who's
actually smart actually educated someone
who doesn't speak in word salad it's
beautiful it's beautiful it's traffic
it's just it's gorgeous it's terrific
but can speak in coherent ways and who
is organized and can appoint people you
can take over this country you could
turn us into a fascist state it wouldn't
be that hard we're at a real deciding
point in this country about what we want
in our future now we can endure Donald
Trump what we need is to have such
decisive action that it pushes back so
strongly it is such a powerful political
force but we don't have to worry for at
least another generation or two about
people like Donald Trump coming into
office and doing something so please
don't leave here feeling depressed
there's plenty to be depressed about
planning to be down about but energized
by the thought that yeah we can do
something and I'm gonna do it I want us
to have a new Congress
I don't expect I'm gonna like everything
our new Congress does I don't expect it
to be perfect look at the progress we've
made in this country
this was a country that started off with
the great compromise that you could own
human beings we got rid of that it costs
us the equivalent in today's population
of six million of us dying of whom by
the way about 15 percent were black
Americans but we we got rid of that
women got the right to vote because men
voted for him the only people who could
were men the advocates in the late
eighteen late nineteenth century for
child labor laws were denounced by the
Jerry Falwell juniors and the other you
know today's TV preacher types who said
it is God's plan that these children
work in the factories and those who are
opposed who proposed these child labor
laws of the agents of the devil
we got child labor laws we got laws that
allowed the organizing of workers for
unions and what does Pope Francis say
about that there's no economic justice
without unions because workers cannot
with the exception of people who are
name-brand talent negotiate for their
pay at the end of the day if you're a
secretary a doctor a lawyer a police
officer a firefighter a biologist your
commodity other people can do something
unless there's something unique and
unusual it's a very tiny segment small
segment of the populations like that if
you don't have a union you're never
gonna get paid what you should we had
union laws and that we let them fritter
away we have these environmental laws
that are still on the books we need to
go back and enforce them we need to be
building a better America in the future
not a worse one so figure out what are
you going to do and do it resolved and
actually do it and if you don't do it
don't complain it's as simple as that
just don't complain so I want to thank
people for coming tonight and I want to
take a lot of a lot of questions I'm
gonna have one rule when you come up to
ask a question if you can't ask a cogent
question I'm going to cut you off let
you figure out how to edit your question
while I talk to the next person and then
we'll come back to you not gonna stop
you but I let's ask questions all right
[Applause]
so you have a question just turn the mic
you and I and everyone knows the media's
diverse and yet it's lambasted and it's
a source of doing a lot of the work you
mentioned how do you think we can
rehabilitate the image too many
unthinking people have of the media so
that they can go to it in a thoughtful
manner well there has been a more than
40 year very well financed sustained
campaign from the right in this country
to denigrate honest journalism I've been
the subject of a lot of it I've tangled
with these people a lot and my answer to
it is you know you you have verifiable
facts that you can prove of the case now
that more that is being picked up as a
lesson of course the answer is well
there are no facts or alternative facts
fundamentally though news organizations
are going to do with news organizations
do especially in this era of much
reduced budgets they're going to tend to
cover the sizzle more than the steak the
New York Times does a great job of
trying to get at the steak but even so
they do more sizzle anybody else they're
going to cover the controversy a lot
more than the underlying issue and even
at the Wall Street Journal lots of
reporters write stories that I read
every day where I go boy that's a really
interesting story to read and it makes
coherent sense except the economics or
nonsense because the writer doesn't know
economics and we're just not going to be
able to fundamentally I think change
that but you know when we started this
country we had party press and they just
made up stories I spend a lot of time
studying the early days of our
Republican that read literally read
reproductions of newspapers from back
then it's amazing I mean they just make
you know governor so-and-so is having an
affair with this this woman and there's
no such woman it's not like they got it
wrong they just made it up and we
survived that okay I do think we need to
have a full frontal assault though on
the president the United States going
around saying
fake news but you know I I don't know I
I don't I don't you know I'm in the
diagnosis business generally not the
solutions business so then I talk with
solutions but Sir what are your
suggestions or what is your solution to
for political tribalism how do we learn
to talk to one of them well political
tribes people know what political
tribalism mean it's this notion that
we've broken down into groups where
there's the other and there's us and we
don't talk to the others and we don't
listen to the others that's part of the
reason I told the story about walking
into blue collar bars which by the way I
didn't do reasonably this was years ago
and there you know when there are big
social changes you have to let them run
out part of the reason Donald Trump is
in office is the same reason the Taliban
are on the rise and we see
ultra-orthodox Jews with some of the
things they're promoting in Israel and
we see ultra-orthodox Muslims with some
of their policies like the Taliban and
it's that there's a segment of the world
population that just cannot cope with
the incredibly rapid rate of change
human knowledge since World War two has
been growing I wouldn't be shocked to
find out it would be correct to say
logarithm attica ly but it's absolutely
been going growing geometrically and if
I'm correct about this that there are a
segment of people who they want their
white picket fence and they want
minorities to know their place and they
want women to you know keep their mouths
shut and and fix dinner you can put your
hand up but the tsunami is just going to
run over you it's a social tsunami
that's got to run its energy out so if
you're a journalist the only thing you
can do is make a record tell everybody
what's going on because eventually they
will recognize it because the energy
will run out and the other is be nice to
other people talk to the people listen
to other people be nice to other people
change the nature of the
intercommunications you have
on a personal level with people don't
cut people off in traffic I mean little
thing like that I live in Rochester New
York where people do not cut you off in
traffic they'll stop and they'll let you
turn I mean I've been studies done about
this why is Rochester like this because
we have a culture that that's what we're
gonna do and you know we stop for people
and if you you drop your your umbrella
on the windy Street there are people who
will chase after it and get it for you
it's just a cultural phenomenon we've
created there you can have everywhere
you don't have to have traffic like LA
does or everybody cuts everybody off
so some interaction but listen to people
and respect that people don't have to
agree with you people don't have to
agree with you we need to agree on what
the basic facts are we have to agree
with the interpretation of the facts so
beyond that I don't know I'm not a
sociologist the conman Agent Orange is
like now but Michael Pence you've
actually addressed what I think is
potentially going to be an enormous
constitutional crisis and could lead to
violence in this country there is I
don't want to put on a downer now but
there is no good ending to Trump's
leaving office we will endure this we
will get past this but his leaving
office there's no good ending assume he
served two terms it's still not going to
be a good ending because when he leaves
he's kind of claimed he was cheated
somehow and the we should repeal the was
at the 22nd amendment that says two
terms if he's not going to be removed
under the 25th amendment that only works
when the president has either as with
Ronald Reagan was shot and God forbid I
don't want that to happen to Tom Trump
and he's out of commission he's under
anesthesia
it works voluntarily it doesn't work to
remove somebody it's just not going to
happen
so assume that the Democrats get control
of Congress and they decide to remove
Donald Trump and they make a case and
persuade the American public that this
is the Russians candidate than the
Manistee
loyal and he's a criminal it won't be
hard to prove he's criminal can Mike
Pence become president because he is
also the beneficiary of the Russians
interfering in our election and Mike
Pence has been credibly reported to have
gone around telling his friends you know
that God put him here and God has a
purpose and a plan he doesn't know what
it is but that's why he's there this
case a small-town radio talk show host
who should go back to being a small-town
radio talk-show host but if the Congress
were to remove under the Democrats both
men and I think they have to do that if
they're going to use the Russians then
the Speaker of the House becomes
president which means most likely Nancy
Pelosi and I can see people already
screaming bloody murder on Fox News this
is a coup d'etat so if that happens I
believe that Nancy or whoever is the
speaker has to say I'm a caretaker
president I will not be involved in the
election in any way I'm just going to
put my hand on the tiller to keep us
moving forward until the next election
we can endure that we're gonna trouble
with that but you've got to be Caesar's
wife so what happens if the Republicans
retain control and the Republicans run a
candidate like Mitt Romney in the
primaries and they primary Donald and he
loses well we know what he's gonna say I
really won it was raped they rigged it
it was really I won the Republican
establishment did this they rigged it
it's all corrupt and now you have to
worry about is he going to try somehow
to do something extra judicial luckily
the latest survey show the officer corps
the military does not support Trump you
know soldiers are willing to go and die
but they're not going to die for stupid
reasons one of the great lessons we
finally got in the American psyche
because a Vietnam is you know you're
gonna go die die for a good reason and
let's assume that he wins the nomination
again and then he loses both the popular
vote and the electoral college it'll be
the same thing it was all rigged I
really want it was all those illegals
who voted in the there's just no good
- this but I do think that if they're
going to remove Trump on the basis of
the Russians you really do have to talk
about content serve and if they say
we're not going to deal with that we're
gonna let him serve just think about
four years of Mike Pence as president
especially if you're a woman especially
if you're a woman and remember this
there are a lot of women who think he
should be president because they agree
with his what I would regard as
absolutely outrageous misogynist views
but there are a lot of women who support
that sure
with the recent special election in
Alabama and and Doug Jones beating Roy
Moore do you think that pretends good
things for this November or was that an
aberration you know with I'm a policy
person I'm not a politics person okay
but it seems to me they're a couple of
lessons from Alabama one of them is what
a horrible bad candidate they ran it
turns out lots of people in Alabama you
know they paid attention to know about
Roy Moore and I suspect that a question
arose and I say this having talked to a
few people who are friends of mine
who've lived in Alabama about Roy
Moore's behavior that's a little
contraindicated and that is just you
know 32 year-old man gets these 14 15 16
year old girls half naked and liquored
up and doesn't try to have sex with them
that suggests there's something else
very deep going on in that man's psyche
that would be death to you as a
conservative Republican at Alabama and
they went a horrible terrible candidate
and when Richard Shelby the senior
senator from Alabama said I'm not voting
for him what happened he came under
attack you know if you run a really bad
candidate guess what you're you're gonna
lose but there are lots of people who
are sort of little bad half bad you know
look what happened to senator Johnston
from Utah versus when Mike Lee ran
against him from the right
in principle guy senator Johnston no
relation and Mike Lee very unprincipled
guy so III don't know it matters a lot
who the candidates are that you run
right now the Democratic National
Committee if you like their finance
reports having trouble raising money
compared to the Republicans money is
rolling into the Republicans and not the
Democrats I get these emails every day
from Nancy Pelosi well they're not from
them but ostensibly from them James
Carville and others we need $1 to defeat
Donald Trump come on are you serious
these are these are a joke and they
suggest the Democrats still don't have
their act together they have it for a
long time there's somebody over here no
I guess we're gonna go from my
perspective to the right of the room
more so I've been very from my
perspective I've been very mystified why
the Republicans are not rising up
against Trump
and well that's easy the reason that
Rises they're not rising against Trump
just look what happens Jeff Flake who is
the most powerful though not powerful
the most prominent important family in
Arizona the people who settled Arizona
it's the flakes they get a town named
after him snowflake and he can't run so
that's done I'm not some Jeff corker he
can't run they will in a primary destroy
him and they'll run the dirtiest
campaign in the world so I don't be
surprised Donald Trump has essentially a
mafia enforcement gang in the Republican
Party led by Robert Mercer the hedge
fund billionaire who says literally in
the paper in the tape record interview
the entire worth of human beings is
based on their financial net worth
most Americans are worth nothing and my
cats are more valuable in most Americans
because they give me pleasure and that
enables me to make more money that makes
me a more important and valuable human
being so anyway all right now go on well
I've speculated that that McConnell and
Ryan that they have a ground plan that
Trump and pence go down and then Ryan
could be president and what do you think
of that and then also what do you think
of McCabe retiring today
well he's retiring because he's not
going to be with us much longer
but I yeah somebody who's actually
broken up conspiracies I'm not big on
conspiracies and either or not what I
see Ryan and McConnell doing McConnell
is a very very competent legislative
practitioner in the Senate and he gets
what he wants and he knows what he wants
and he plays his cards very very
brilliantly and he wants out of Donald
Trump certain things he wants this tax
bill they just got and he got it by the
way how many of you think Apple and a
bunch of other companies just paid
billions of dollars in taxes you read
that didn't you in the newspapers heard
it on TV go to DC report org and you
will find out they didn't pay it this
was a con game they will pay it in the
future but you really should go go to DC
report organ and read our story that ran
yesterday the Apple tax scam because
promise you it is we just read the bill
and they didn't pay the money so I don't
I don't think starter that's their game
I think they figure we can use this guy
they have been real successful at it I
mean they control the White House the
House the Senate and the Supreme Court
arguably and him none much compared to
what you would expect sir should there's
somebody over here they'll come back to
you fair enough so I had resonated with
the political termites point you made
earlier and one of the things I've seen
as well being from the center of the
country is there is a sort of divide
between the bigger cities that are
really getting a lot of benefit in our
modern era so how what policy or what
recommendations would you help say would
help empower those sort of Middle States
areas
well the world changes okay if you were
born in Dickens
England you know life was very different
than if you're your grandfather your
grandmother had and we're in the middle
of an enormous fundamental change in the
world that we don't understand we can't
understand it because we're in the
middle of it but what we're seeing is
large numbers of people are being left
behind economically Angus Deaton the
Nobel Prize mccomus just had a piece in
The New York Times about the millions of
Americans who live on a dollar or two
dollars a day I wrote that story for the
New York Times from my analysis of the
data about 10 years ago and I wanted to
be very cautious I couldn't be attacked
and the number I settled on after
looking at the various ways to do the
numbers was $7 a day and oh you know
this is a obviously on-trail I should be
fired this is incompetent Deaton's
closer to what's right I actually wanted
to use a number about $3 from the
analysis I did and we haven't figured
out what to do about this what do we do
about people who we're living in a world
where the amount of brain power you have
and then your willingness to work with
that brainpower is gonna have a huge
determination on your income industrial
society created jobs through
inefficiency when the first steel was
made 2,000 1,000 years ago in India or
they invented it
guys with big muscles would take coal
carbon carbon from coal and wood and
pound it into red-hot steel and it would
take more than it would take multiple
years of labor to create one ton of
steel in vanquished societies in the
ancient world the tribute that was paid
to the Conqueror was often not paid in
gold or diamonds it was paid in steel if
you watch Game of Thrones what is the
common thread that goes everywhere oh
that's a sword made of Valyrian steel
it's the big thing running it all
through one of the big things all the
way through it and we're now living in a
world where you know if you weren't born
with a lot of smarts the future doesn't
look so good for you and because
inefficiency creates lots of jobs as we
I'm efficient they're gonna go away and
we're not even talking about what do we
do about that
there are proposed solutions the
capitalist manifesto of the 1950's had a
solution everybody should be a
capitalist the problem with that lots of
people when they get capital they don't
think long term they don't think about
oh I've got a million dollars and I can
spend twenty five thousand dollars a
year forever they think oh I can buy a
sports car and a boat and go gamble and
it's so you know human development we're
going to go through a real problem here
and it isn't one state or another it's
the fundamental world economy of what's
going on and you know it's it's a it's a
big big problem but I don't know the
solution of it I've thought a lot about
the problems it's going to bring and it
may lead to a lot of violence if we
don't take care of people one way or
another it's gonna lead to a lot of
violence there have been by the way a
number of very interesting experiments
around the world done with the basic
income everybody gets an income and the
assumption you might have is well then
people just sit around drink beer and
have sex and not do anything now
actually turns out most people if you
give them a basic income use that to
improve their status they may not work
real hard they might decide to work a
little less hard but they figure out how
to use that income to get an education
or start a little business or do
something that will improve their lives
a little bit so thank you for your
patience related question question part
a Lindsey Graham said if trunk fire
mulher there would be hell to pay
so the question that one day he said
yeah yeah do you believe that would
happen Part B is if Muller's report
shows an impeachable offense with the
house impeach in the Republican House
impeach him and with the Senate
convicted okay
there's no chance the Republicans are
going to impeach Donald Trump barring
something really out there okay I mean
what I expect to see in the Moller
report the Republicans are not going to
move on they're gonna explain and excuse
it away and everything else and Lindsey
Graham has proven to be a slippery on
the issue of Muller's position as is you
can possibly imagine
first of all Chuck can't fire Muller
even though I watched sorry old age the
the independent prosecutor went after
Bill Clinton and was later at Star Ken
Starr on Fox News today saying of course
he can fire and he should fire him and
he went on and on it's not true we have
rules and regulations about this he has
to get rod Rosenstein to fire arm rod
Rosenstein will clearly resign there's
another person a woman who's next in
line but go for down if you're willing
to fire enough people you'll get to
somebody who will fire Moeller for him
if he wants well when Archibald Cox got
fired the people just all came to work
now if trump's going to do it the
question is again try and shut this down
and there's the flaw in the idea of
doing that
Muller's people were very smart to tell
Eric Schneiderman the Attorney General
of New York that it was ok to let the
public know that he was working with
Muller's team because many of the crimes
Donald Trump has committed our state
crimes in New York as well so pardons
won't help him and other things won't
help him and I'm sure that Sneiderman
has lots of the records through a
sharing arrangement and they've got the
documents right now if we had the bait
stamps on them to sell lawyers track
things I assure you that number is well
past a million and probably millions of
pages of documents witnesses and people
you've never heard of and so I don't
think the Republicans would act on the
firing of Muller some of them would be
quibbling but I don't see Ryan and
McConnell moving to replace Trump
barring something really outrageous I
mean if we could come up with the direct
videotape where Donald Trump says
vladimer I pledge I'm going to turn over
the America to you and of course Donald
would say that's not my voice why
wouldn't they what happened because well
but that's we we got rid of that and we
got rid of it through Dick Armey the
congressman from Texas give me the last
guy Dick Armey the congressman from
Texas who said and then it was
popularized by Grover Norquist
bipartisanship is date-rape political
date-rape and it used to be that you
know members of Congress when they took
the train to go to Washington and they
were there for months at the time
Democrats and Republicans lived together
like cats and dogs and they drank
together they smoked they played cards
they did other things ma'am away from
home for long periods of time they've
been known to do and they knew about
each other that's all gone there is not
a single Democrat living in the same
house as a Republican today not one if
they share a taxicab they thinks that's
bipartisanship and at freshly in the
house and we need to stop that we need
to get that back we need to have people
conversing and recognizing that
compromise is what democracy is this my
way or the highway that's got to go and
we can't do that with the Congress we
have because it's full of people
especially the freedom caucus people who
are my way or the highway you know if
you're an absolutist about abortion
right down to the point where any birth
control is it should be illegal you got
to get that person voted out of office
or are you going to continue that
argument you get the lawrence O'Donnell
says the last word or at least the last
question I'll take it as a Republican
what kind of tax policy me I'm a
registered Republican that's what does
that mean that means I vote in the
Republican primaries okay you get to
vote in the Republican primaries where I
lived those are the more interesting
primaries all right that was and be by
voting in them you know it means like
you can I got the chance to vote for a
man who believes dinosaurs and human
beings live together and that the cure
diabetes is cinnamon buns I mean
wouldn't you get opportunities like this
okay
then then my last my second question
yeah so it's not relevant do you see the
states rights movement rising in America
what do you think about that boy this is
one of the great paradoxes right states
rights movements have been a way to put
Jim Crow in to deny the 13th 14th and
15th amendments and undo the Civil War
and where is it that states rights have
proven to be most important recent years
is with liberals and progressives if if
the Democrats during the Al Gore vote
Regan and George Bush vote recount had
had the courage to say to the Supreme
Court under our Constitution gentlemen
and you particularly Justice Scalia
someone who talks about the original
intent have no business in this matter
this is entirely for the electors of
Florida George Bush probably wouldn't
have become president and yet know they
were good liberals they couldn't bring
themselves to do this I think we're
gonna have a lot more discussion in this
country about federalism about separate
state laws you're seeing a California
basically saying you don't want to
enforce the federal environmental laws
fine we got state laws and now we're
going to have a fight over the Supremacy
Clause of the Constitution but one of
the best things you can do is go home
and read the Constitution it's only four
thousand words with a basic Constitution
and 3000 for the amendments you'll find
stuff I'll bet you didn't know was in
there letters of marque blood libel all
sorts of interesting things so I want to
leave you with the most important
message here please do read my book okay
because my book is about what matters to
you and to your children and to your
grandchildren and to the rest of the
world you want to read Michael Wolf's
book which by the way verifies my
previous book about Donald Trump please
do it's entertaining and it's nice and
he's a great gossip writer but if you
want to know what's happening to our
government and what Trump is doing to
you and you want to arm yourself with
facts that you are seeing if you've seen
them in the news mostly just dis
glancingly not as a focus you
need to read my book you can give it the
library you have to buy it necessarily
but read it so that you understand what
is being done to our government by this
manifestly unqualified criminal cocaine
trafficking pal powder cocaine
trafficking ignoramus named Donald Trump
so thank you thank you David
I want to quibble with one point I think
you should consider buying the book and
the LA Bay tables right back there and
he's signing them that way you have a
signed copy and it's not just the
fantastic reporting but it's the comment
as well as you just heard thank you so
much for being with us and we'll see you
all soon
[Applause]